---
ID: archelon-0003
Status: Active
Date: August 8, 2024

---
# Rails 7.1/Blacklight 8/Ruby 3 Upgrade

## Context

As of August 2024, Archelon had multiple dependencies that were well beyond
their end-of-life (EOL) dates, specifically:

- Rails 5.2.x - EOL July 12, 2022
- Ruby 2.7.x - EOL March 30, 2023

While Blacklight does not appear to have an official "end of life" policy, the
use of v6.2.3 puts Archelon two major versions behind the main project.

The latest versions of each of these dependencies, as of August 2024, were:

- Rails - 7.1
- Ruby 3.2
- Blacklight 8.3

### Upgrade Approaches

Two approaches were considered for the upgrade:

* Incremental version upgrades
* Functionality migration

#### Incremental version upgrades

The "incremental version upgrades" process would be to upgrade each dependency
in small increments, such as:

* Upgrade to Rails 6.0, then 6.1, then 7.0, then 7.1
* Upgrade to Ruby 3.0, then 3.1, then 3.2, as allowed by the Rails upgrades
* Update to Blacklight 7, then Blacklight 8, as allowed by the Rails upgrades

The main advantage of this approach was that a working system could, in theory,
be maintained at all times, and the amount of change at each step would be
manageable.

The disadvantages to this approach were:

* At least in the initial upgrade steps, the application would still be
  running using dependencies that were beyond their end-of-life dates,
  so the ability to stop development at that point would not put the application
  in a significantly better position.
* Archelon requires significant manual testing, which would theoretically be
  required at each upgrade step.
* With Rails, some parts of the framework, such as the asset pipeline, flucuate
  wildly between versions, meaning that some work would have to be redone in
  some upgrade steps.

#### Functionality migration

The "functionality migration" process would be a process in which the most
recent version of each dependency would be utilized, and the Archelon
functionality would be migrated into it.

This would consist of creating a new Rails 7.1 application using Blacklight 8
and Ruby 3.2, and then migrating Archelon functionality into that new
application.

This "jump to the end" approach has the advantage of being potentially faster,
as most development and testing activity would only need to be done once.

The disadvantages to this approach were:

* Significantly riskier than the incremental approach, as the application
  would not be in a fully "working" state until the end of the migration, i.e.,
  it was "all or nothing"
* The learning curve of jumping into new versions of the dependencies
  (particularly Rails and Blacklight)

## Decision

After much discussion, the decision was made to do a "functionality migration"
for the following reasons:

* The need to do up to 4 Rails migrations (with attendant testing, and
  troubleshooting of changes) was seen to be excessive. This was compounded
  by the fact that the guidance regarding the "asset pipeline" changed between
  Rails 5 and 6, and then again for Rails 7, meaning that there would likely
  be work done for each upgrade that would then be "thrown away" at the next
  upgrade.

* An incremental Blacklight migration would have required two migrations -- to
  Blacklight 7 and then to Blacklight 8. Many of the changes made to
  Blacklight 8 (such as the use of "View Components" instead of Rails ERB
  templates), were back-ported to Blacklight 7. This made a direct upgrade to
  Blacklight 8 more attractive, because the application would have to deal with
  the Blacklight changes in either the "incremental" or "migration" approach.

* Because the current Archelon is usable "as-is", and that bug fixes/patches are
  not impeded by developing the successor, the failure of an "all or nothing"
  approach would not be an existential threat to the application.

* A functionality migration approach would be more likely to identify and
  eliminate obsolete code or files that are no longer necessary.

## Consequences

### Cleaner code base

One expected consequence of the "functionality migration" approach is that the
resulting upgraded Archelon will have a cleaner codebase, in that any
obsolete functionality or files will not be migrated.


### Git History

The use of the "functionality migration" approach will likely affect the
the Git history of the codebase.

In an "incremental version upgrades" approach, the changes could be easily
merged back into the existing "main" branch, providing a full history of
each change to the files. Running `git blame` on a file would correctly
attribute lines that been changed in the upgrade to the commit made in the
upgrade, while lines that hadn't been changed would point to pre-upgrade
commits.

In the "functionality migration" approach, the existing files are essentially
deleted, and then recreated in new commits. When merging in these changes, there
are two possibilities:

1. Merge the changes, using `git merge`.

   This would result in `git blame` only showing change information made as
   part of the upgrade (i.e., the initial copy of the file made as part of the
   upgrade, and then any changes made for the upgrade).

2. Manually copy all the files from the upgrade into the "main" branch

   This would result in a single commit containing all the changes made in the
   upgrade. Running `git blame` on a file would attribute all changes made for
   the upgrade to a single commit, while lines that hadn't changed would show
   the correct pre-upgrade commit.

   The main loss with this approach is that the commit history for the upgrade
   would be less accessible (it would still be available on the branch, if the
   branch were preserved).

It is currently undecided which approach will be used, but the "manual copy"
approach seems likely, as it preserves most of the history.
