---
ID: archelon-0004
Status: Active
Date: August 8, 2024

---
# Rails 7.1 Asset Pipeline

## Context

The Rails "asset pipeline" is the mechanism by which JavaScript and CSS files
are packaged for use by the application.

Unfortunately, the Rails-recommended "asset pipeline" approach has changed for
every major version since at least Rails 5:

* Rails 4.x - "sprockets-rails" gem
* Rails 5.1 - "webpacker" gem (optional)
* Rails 6.0 - "webpacker" gem (default)
* Rails 7.0 - "webpacker" gem retired, replaced by importmaps, jsbundling-rails,
              cssbundling-rails

While it is technically possible to use the "sprockets-rails" or "webpacker" gem
with Rails 7, it is clearly not the "future-proof" solution.

One of the goals of changing the asset pipeline in Rails 7.0 was to make it more
tool-agnostic via the "jsbundling-rails" and "cssbundling-rails" gems, which
basically only require that the application-ready JavaScript and CSS files be
placed in the `app/assets/builds​` directory. This leaves all necessary
compilation, transpiling, or other conversions, such as
TypeScript-to-JavaScript, React JSX-to-JavaScript, and SCCS-to-CSS, the
domain of any build tool, as long as the results end up in the
`app/assets/builds​` directory as one or more JavaScript and CSS files.

Archelon uses JavaScript for:

* The React components used for metadata editing
* Dynamically updating the status of the import, export, and publish jobs
* Enabling selection for the "Selected Items" functionality.

### Asset Pipeline Options

The Rails 7.x-recommended default, "importmaps" is not suitable for Archelon,
because it does not support React.

Unfortunately, there are a number of JavaScript build tools, without
a clear favorite:

* webpack (distinct from the "webpacker" gem)
* esbuild
* rollup
* shakapacker

#### webpack

The "webpacker" gem was intended to make the "webpack" application more
friendly to Rails developers. While webpack is likely the oldest and most
functional of the JavaScript build tools, it is also the most complicated to
setup and configure.

#### esbuild/rollup

Considered to be "next-generation" (with "webpack" being the old generation) of
JavaScript build tools that more favor "convention over configuration" and
extensibility via plugins.

#### shakapacker

A fork of the "webpacker" gem that is maintained by a consulting firm focused
on Rails applications.

## Decision

None of the JavaScript build tools has a clear advantage over the others, in
that all would require at least some customization of the existing Archelon
Rails application.

While "shakapacker" would likely be the easiest migration, its association with
a commericial firm and the fact that Rails 7 has specifically abandoned the
"webpacker" gem from which it originated doesn't seem to bode well for its
future.

The "webpack" gem was also considered, but it is widely regarded as the most
complicated of the JavaScript build tools to setup and configure.

Ultimately, it was decided to use "esbuild", as the setup seemed relatively
straightforward, and it is also extremely fast.

## Consequences

There was no particularly strong rationale for choosing "esbuild" over any of
the other tools. This may lead us to reconsider this decision in the future, if
experience shows it is not ideal for our situation.
